This year started with intense *plein air* work in oils. My skill gradually
improved and I continued till June when I realized that I was simply
repeating something I knew how to do. There were two problems:

* The problem of the subject: I felt that I was following a pre-conceived
  idea of what e.g. a landscape painting should look like and it was rather
  narrow, dictated by my cultural baggage. There was the need to find a new
  type of subject and/or composition.
* The problem of rendition: I wanted to avoid flat areas of color and
  achieve a more raw and organic look.

For a change I put oils on hold and switched to watercolors. I was never
happy with my watercolors before, but in June I managed to do a few works
that I liked. It seemed that simplicity and being slightly out of control
were part of the recipe. At the time I still thought that the value of my
art was purely visual, so I started looking more at Paul Cézanne and the
whole array of abstract art of the twentieth century in order to figure out
the way forward.

I briefly considered going abstract, but then again I could not decide how I
would do it. To do abstract art one needs to select an approach or a
procedure. I could think of a few options, but how to choose one approach
over the other? This was a similar problem to the one I had in
[2022](/art/2022.html) with respect to intentional changes in the way
perceived reality is depicted. More fundamentally, going abstract meant
opting for beauty instead of truth which I found unacceptable. Therefore I
continued figurative work.

Interestingly, the “insight” of abstraction stuck with me around August and
the beginning of September, but I could not renounce my way of painting
reality exactly as I saw it, so I had to go around and find already existing
objects that would exhibit desirable qualities from a visual point of view.
Around mid-September I realized that I was trying to marry two incompatible
approaches, so I gave up on thinking about the visual impact in my work.

In late September I concluded that it didn't matter what artworks looked
like, since there were already all kinds of artworks out there. Cosmetic
considerations were not abandoned, but they stopped being central. What
mattered was how artworks were made and the intention behind them. I
accepted that I had always been a realist and that I should be building
something on top of realism. I also started to think about what others must
be seeing in this or that painting and what I wanted them to see. The
subject matter changed in order to guide the viewer towards seeing only raw
reality. In a few months [real realism](/essay/real-realism.html) was
formulated as a full-fledged artistic approach. Real realism naturally
united many ideas that until then seemed random and unrelated. It also
converted me from a visual artist into a perception artist. Now painting was
only a pretext for a more thorough investigation of reality and the artworks
were but a side-effect of that investigation.
