This year started with intense plein air work in oils. My skill gradually
improved and I continued till June when I realized that I was simply
repeating something I knew how to do. There were two problems:

* The problem of the subject. I felt that I'm following a pre-conceived idea
  of what e.g. a landscape painting looks like and it is rather narrow,
  dictated by my cultural baggage. There was the need to find a new type of
  subject and/or composition.
* The problem of rendition. I felt that I wanted to avoid flat areas of
  color and achieve a more raw and organic look.

For a change I put oils on hold and switched to watercolors. I was never
happy with my watercolors before, but in June I managed to do a few works
that I liked. It seemed that simplicity and being slightly out of control
was part of the recipe. At the time I still thought that the value of my art
was purely visual, so I started looking more at Paul Cézanne and the whole
array of abstract art of XX century in order to figure out the way forward.

I briefly considered going abstract, but then again I could not decide how I
should do it. To do abstract art one needs to select an approach or a
procedure. I could think of a few options, but how to choose one approach
over the other? The choice must be justifiable or otherwise it is arbitrary.
This was a similar problem to the one I had in [2022](/art/2022.html) with
respect to intentional changes in the way perceived reality is depicted.
More fundamentally, going abstract meant to opt for beauty instead of truth
which I found unacceptable. Therefore I continued figurative work.

Interestingly, the “insight” of abstraction stuck with me around August and
beginning of September, but I could not renounce my way of painting reality
exactly as I see it, so I had to go around and find already existing objects
that would exhibit the desirable qualities from the visual point of view.
Around mid-September I realized that I was trying to marry two incompatible
approaches, so I gave up on thinking about the visual impact in my work.

In the late September I realized that it doesn't really matter what artworks
look like, since there are already all kinds of artworks out there. What
matters is how artworks are made and the intention behind them. I accepted
that I was going to be a realist. I also started to think about what others
must be seeing in this or that painting and what I wanted them to see. The
subject matter changed in order to guide the viewer towards seeing only raw
reality and nothing else, no artistic intention of any kind. In a few months
[real realism](/essay/real-realism.html) was formulated as a full-fledged
artistic approach. Real realism naturally united many ideas that until then
seemed random and unrelated. It also converted me from a visual artist into
a perception artist. Now painting was only a pretext for more thorough
investigation of reality and the artworks were but a side-effect of that
investigation.
