The first change this year is my growing aesthetic acceptance of the real.
While I did proclaim something like this as early as 2023 in connection with
[real realism][real-realism], *de facto* only certain classes of things
could enter my photos and paintings. This has changed in late 2024 and 2025.
First, I accepted rubbish/waste as an organic part of reality, including
nature. It is quite different from incorporating waste in an artwork on
purpose in order to make an ecological statement. In the latter there is a
moral/ecological demarcation between nature and waste (as in what should be
and what should not be), whereas I no longer separate them. Indeed, we only
have this polluted nature now, and no other, hence it is this nature we must
embrace and depict. To me plastics that I see in nature are products of
nature like leaves and trees. Plastics are simply produced a little bit more
indirectly, through humans, who are also part of nature and reality. This of
course does not mean that I condone pollution. What it means is that e.g. if
some rubbish or waste is in the frame when I take a picture, they have no
disqualifying force aesthetically or otherwise, I will accept them as part
of what there is.

Another aesthetic change has been inspired by mid-19th century realism and
Linda Nochlin's book on the subject. I have used much of the realist method
from the beginning, in that my art was never anything but objective
snapshots of the world without any extra commentary or guidance. However, I
neglected the aspect modernity, e.g. such as cars, computers, etc. Now they
are also included in my artworks and not because I force myself to include
them, but because I truly embrace what reality looks like at this point in
time.

Quite separate from the changes outlined above I started thinking about a
variation in art. At first I had in mind something that I used to call
“microvariation”, which was really anything that makes an artwork look
organic and not flat, since I have developed a kind of allergy to anything
modernist and flat in appearance. The notion of “microvariation” seemed to
be vaguely related to the disappearance of sources of variation associated
with analogue processes, such as those in film photography and analogue
audio production. I started to investigate this notion of variation
philosophically and arrived at a more general concept of “contingent
variation” in arts, which roughly can be summarized as aspects of an artwork
that were not pre-visualized (intended with respect to result), but were
accepted. On this view, the process of canvas preparation that I adopted
last year could be seen as a way to increase contingent variation in a
painting.

Guided by the idea of lifting any remaining biases in selection of views to
paint and by the intriguing idea of introducing contingent variation that
applies to elements of high salience (the choice of the scene itself), I
developed [a little application][viewfinder] that allowed me to find random
views around the area where I live. This has proven to be a perfect tool in
that it points me to views that are completely objective and are not
influenced by any legacy art considerations. The only downside is that I had
to mostly give up painting through direct observation of the subject, since
this new kind of scenes is often not suitable for that approach. However, it
is clear that instead of doing what is easy and accessible one has to adjust
the painting process so as to implement one's vision.

Another idea that came to my mind is something I jokingly call “ecological
realism”. The idea is to paint by approximating a normal human field of
view. In order to achieve that I had first to determine the aspect ratio of
human field of view. Rather than looking up a ready answer online I
approached this empirically and arrived at something like 1.6. This
translates to canvases of the size 50x80cm, of which I ordered quite a few.
The aspect ratio is not the only consideration though, there is also the
question of angle of view (or in photographic terms, focal length). It seems
like humans see almost 180° in front of them. This is too much and the
resolution is only high in the middle. Hence, I approximated this with a
16mm lens on my digital camera.

What is interesting about this approach is that it alleviates much of the
brutality that comes from more tight and selective framing.

The central thing is the focus: implicitly

Drone

All of these considerations and ideas are fused together in my art. While
there is a fair amount of novelty this year, I remain loyal to my realist
agenda and intend to build organically on top of what I have already
developped in the last couple of years.

[real-realism]: /essay/real-realism.html
[viewfinder]: https://github.com/mrkkrp/viewfinder
