I consider that in the second half of 2024 I attained a satisfactory level
of visual communication. The way things look, the technical aspect of my
art, thus needs no intentional updates at that point. Therefore, in the new
year I want to make progress with what my art is about and not necessarily
what it looks like.

Since [2023] I have been calling myself a realist, so it is only logical to
revisit the original mid-19th century realist movement for inspiration. For
this purpose I found [Linda Nochlin's book][linda-nochlin-realism] on the
subject most insightful. My takeaway from the book is that the essence of
the realist approach was the elegant idea that things could be simply
demonstrated in an impartial and objective manner, much like documentary
photographs. This is a method that I find timeless and appealing in that it
keeps the scope of interpretation at its largest. It also treats the viewer
with respect by leaving them to do their own thinking—a welcome contrast in
the world that increasingly favors the illusion that there are quick and
easy answers to most questions.

From a practical point of view, the first adjustment that I wanted to make
to my art was to include more things that I had previously avoided
(consciously or unconsciously). *Il faut être de son temps* was the slogan
of the realists and I also want to implement it. Elements of modernity are
not my special focus, but they needed to enter my works in order to lift an
important bias. I don't like or dislike cars and computers from an aesthetic
point of view, but they are part of reality and so they have to be
represented or at least not discriminated against. The same goes for waste.
I accept rubbish and waste as an organic part of reality, including nature.
It is quite different from incorporating waste in an artwork on purpose in
order to make an ecological statement. In the latter case there is a moral
demarcation between nature and waste (as in what should be and what should
not be), whereas I no longer separate them. Indeed, we only have this
(polluted) nature now, and no other, hence it is this nature we must embrace
and depict. To me plastics that I see in nature are products of nature like
leaves and trees. Plastics are simply produced more indirectly, through
humans, who are also part of nature. This, of course, does not mean that I
condone pollution. What it means is that e.g. if some rubbish or waste is in
the frame when I take a picture, they have no disqualifying force
aesthetically or otherwise, I will accept them as part of what there is.

The second thing I wanted to do is to get rid of the vestige of real realism
in the form of the characteristic way of framing things. I realize now that
it can be confusing for the viewer and can invite certain formalist
interpretations, which is not desirable. I painted the last works with this
style of framing in January.

An important departure from the original realist movement is that I believe
that *il faut être de son lieu* as well. I want to concentrate on things
that immediately surround me, not on things that are deemed important. I
think that not being content with what you have is at the root of many
disasters of this century, therefore I find it morally compelling to stop
the perverse skew in what people are instructed to value by society.

Quite separate from the changes outlined above I started thinking about
variation in art. At first I had in mind something that I used to call
“microvariation”, which was really anything that makes an artwork look
organic and not flat, since I developed a kind of allergy to anything
modernist and flat in appearance. The notion of “microvariation” seemed to
be vaguely related to sources of variation associated with analogue
processes, such as those in film photography and analogue audio production.
I started to investigate this notion of variation philosophically and
arrived at a more general concept of “contingent variation” in arts, which
roughly can be summarized as aspects of an artwork that were not
pre-visualized (intended with respect to result), but were accepted. On this
view, the process of canvas preparation that I adopted last year can be seen
as a way to increase contingent variation in a painting. I see contingent
variation as one of the main sources of innovation; it is at the root of
such important principles in art as mystery and paradox. I will provide more
details, as usual, in a dedicated essay that I hope to publish later this
year.

[2023]: /art/2023.html
[linda-nochlin-realism]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/293904.Realism
