Every year I ask myself what should my art be? The current answers:

* It should be understandable and make an impression that is in no need for
  explanation and can be appreciated by a large part of the population. This
  is what good art of the past succeeds in doing.
* However, it should not be driven by the desire to appeal to large masses
  of people educated by the naive aesthetics of social media.
* It has to be figurative and derive its value primarily from its ability to
  refer to material reality that is immediately recognizable.
* It should make a comment on what it takes to live a (mundane) human life
  these days, its practical needs, and how satisfying these needs affects
  the world. Ideally, this kind of comment should be multilayered, it should
  cut across, so to speak, by commenting on more than one aspect.
* Alternatively, the composition can be a metaphor for something that is
  currently going on in the world.

What is the role of aesthetics in all this? I was tempted to subscribe to
the radical view that one can learn to extend their taste indefinitely as
part of personal aesthetic evolution and a self-imposed challenge. According
to this view, aesthetics is primarily guided by cultural tradition which
needs to be overcome in progressive art. Besides, the mere fact of painting
something in a style that is natural to the artist makes the work
aesthetically valuable enough. Therefore, as long as the program outlined
above is followed, no extra effort or consideration is required *vis-à-vis*
aesthetics. But is this really true? It is definitely not what happens in
practice. The beauty of the resolution from the previous section is a
rational kind of beauty whereas when it comes to selecting material and
creating a painting there is a distinct visual kind of beauty that has a
major influence on what gets done. Can or should its role be diminished?
That may as well be a way to make progress. If the role of the visual aspect
can be diminished without inhibiting art production, it may be meaningful to
consider that question; if not, this question does not stand. Here I base my
judgment on the supposition that what tends to motivate the artist is indeed
somehow an appropriate type of work for that artist. For me, the visual
aspect does *de facto* play a major role no matter what I'd like to say from
a purely intellectual point of view. Therefore, a successful painting must
satisfy both the rational and visual standards of quality. The rational
aspect can be set through deliberation, but the visual one seems to live its
own life.

All my paintings from 2025 onward have been done from photographs. At first
I thought of this approach as cheating, but now I realize that I work best
this way. The obvious advantage here is that I can source more candidate
material, including material that would not be possible to paint at the
scene. I can be much more selective about what I choose to paint. Sometimes
I review hundreds of candidate photographs before I see something that
works.

Here are my self-imposed constraints when it comes to painting from
photographs:

* All photographs must be original, taken by me.
* Only one painting can be made from one given photograph.
* Once the painting is complete I delete the photograph.
* The painting has to be made within a week (ideally, but sometimes a little
  longer) from the time the photograph was made, otherwise the photo becomes
  too old and I lose the right to paint from it. This is an attempt to keep
  painting synced with life, make a kind of diary out of it.
* The painting must be done in a single session, *alla prima*, 3 hours
  maximum for oils, faster for watercolors. Once it is done, the result has
  to be accepted and never adjusted.

Looking back at 2025 and comparing my output in 2026 with that year, I still
see some progress, but it is now more subtle. This applies mostly to oils, I
believe I still have a long way to go with my watercolors. With oils, I am
aware that I am probably reaching a plateau in my artistic practice. This is
not necessarily bad, since I see that I am getting pretty close to what I
want to make at this point in my life. I believe I can still get closer to
my goal (the kind of goal that is partially concealed from me, as it happens
in artistic search) before I start repeating myself, at which point a change
will be necessary.

One way to make progress when no other variables in the process seem to
require adjustments is to experiment with the size. It may sound trite, but
size matters in painting. I have been slowly increasing the size of my
canvases over the years and this year I intend to paint my largest works to
date.
