---
title: Perception routines
date:
  published: 2025-02-10
---

```toc
```

The present essay builds upon [my earlier work on real
realism][real-realism] and revisits many of the ideas that originally were
introduced there, such as the concept of non-trivial intentions and the real
realist intention (RRI). My goal is to develop an approach to perception of
material reality that implements the RRI better than conventional art forms,
painting in particular. In order to make progress, however, it appears
imperative to backtrack and give the concepts of non-trivial intentions and
the RRI more principled and comprehensive treatment. Much of the present
essay is dedicated to that task. The remaining part of the essay covers some
aspects of how the suggested approach to perception can be implemented in
practice.

## Problems with painting

In the essay on real realism I formulate two ideas:

* The importance of intention: there cannot be a work of art without a
  non-trivial intention behind it.
* The real realist intention: resist the general trend in allocation of
  attention and explore raw reality more thoroughly.

The rest of the essay on real realism is concerned with how the RRI can be
implemented through painting. While acknowledging that there is still the
hanging question about the exact meaning of the RRI (what does it mean to
explore reality “more thoroughly”?), I think that it is not meaningless to
point out a number of ways in which painting does not seem to be suitable
for implementation of the RRI:

* Most importantly, it is the artist and not the audience that goes through
  the perceptual experience that is aligned with the RRI. It should be the
  other way around. Better yet, there should not be a distinction between
  the artist and the audience. Appreciation of reality in the sense defined
  by the RRI should be accessible to everyone (let us call this the
  accessibility goal).
* With painting, only the visual perception is exercised. Ideally, all
  modalities should be exercised where it makes sense.
* A cultural message of an artwork is never completely defined by the
  artwork itself. It is always evaluated against the backdrop of art history
  and culture in general. This imposes artificial constraints on what an
  artwork can be if it is to communicate the intended message. It is
  desirable to find a way to lift these constraints.
* Even if the artist succeeds in communicating the real realist message
  (RRM) by following the guidelines from the essay on real realism, the RRM
  is infinitely more shallow than the kind of phenomenological realizations
  that an individual can experience through engaging with reality directly
  (more on this below).
* Finally, painting has a productive aspect: it is about making a certain
  kind of object. This is problematic in two ways:
  * The artist cannot dedicate all their attention to attending to a scene
    in the sense defined by the RRI, since the painting process demands
    attention of a different kind.
  * It causes confusion in the audience by inviting it to see the resulting
    artwork as a valuable object, the end goal instead of a means.

Because of these considerations I want to backtrack and explore how reality
can be experienced “more thoroughly” without art-making in the traditional
sense.

Before I begin though, there is the subtle question of whether it is
meaningful to implement the RRI through something that may or may not be
considered art, given that both the RRI and the thesis of the importance of
non-trivial intentions were derived in the context of a discussion on art.

## Art and non-trivial intentions

In the essay on real realism non-trivial intentions were introduced as a way
to produce composite artworks—physical objects paired with the corresponding
non-trivial intentions—that are unattainable through automation no matter
how sophisticated. I would like to start this section with a thought
experiment that (re)introduces non-trivial intentions as a useful tool for
discussions on value of art[1](footnote:1). I will proceed by giving a more
precise definition of what it means for an intention to be non-trivial.
Finally, I will consider whether the concept of non-trivial intentions is
tied to art.

Suppose there is a process P consisting of a computer program and whatever
hardware equipment that is necessary to produce outstanding artworks of a
given type according to whatever jury or consensus. It does not matter who
is in the jury. Let it be configurable. Further, let us say that the process
P is not static in the sense that it is capable of not only satisfying a
fixed criteria of what constitutes a good work of art, but it is also
capable of innovation through extrapolation from a significant body of
existing artworks. Let us further grant that P has access to information
about current developments in the world and their significance, so that it
is capable of basing its artistic output on this data in a creative way. All
of this is technically within the reach of the AI technology of the (near)
future. For many people, P constitutes a perfect artist capable of producing
an unlimited stream of valuable artworks.

Perhaps some people would not be at ease with the nature of P, since I have
said that it is a computer program. Such people might maintain that they
assign more value to human-produced artworks based purely on moral
considerations. There are, however, problems with this stance:

* There is no way to tell whether a particular artwork has been created by P
  or by a human artist.
* A human artist might as well be configuring and running P as their tool of
  choice for producing an artwork. Should we still refuse to consider the
  output valuable in that case? Is the artwork created by the human artist
  or by P?
* The argument that something is valuable simply because it is produced by a
  human needs philosophical defense and justification. Whatever moral
  considerations that support this stance have to be explicitly stated and
  critically analyzed. It is perhaps more promising to suppose that there
  should be something more to human-produced output than simply the fact
  that it is human-produced.

Some other people might be inclined to focus on what artworks are rather
than what they say (if these two things can be separated at all). That is a
logical shift in values caused by proliferation of means of mass
reproduction. Nevertheless, it seems superficial and insufficient to link
value of art to materiality, which is, after all, easily achievable. To
remove this consideration from the equation, I stipulate that P is connected
to hardware equipment that enables it to produce physical objects, not just
files.

What is the problem with letting P produce an unlimited stream of valuable
artworks? The problem is that “unlimited” does not go well with “valuable”,
at least not when it comes to art. If something can be made with zero effort
at any moment, it is hardly valuable. It is certainly not valuable in the
sense in which we understand value of art. Art is supposed to be something
that breaks the routine and provokes realizations. If we have seen thousands
of outstanding works by P, just how outstanding is any of them? Outstanding
compared to what?

Logically, we must value things that are scarce, things that we do not take
for granted. In fact, it does not matter whether P is a machine or it stands
for a highly skilled individual. The reason I introduced a computer program
is simply to dissuade the reader from equating skills and creativity with
value. Such equivalence was possible in the past, but now it is not good
enough because of the abundance of skills and creativity both in humans and
otherwise. Value must lie at a different level. I suggest that value is in
non-trivial intentions.

The adjective “non-trivial” has to be there because having an intention is
not good enough. True, unlike skills and creativity, intentions are still
exclusive to humans, but there are always intentions to be found at the base
of any human activity. P, if ever created, will surely be created with a
certain intention. Therefore, we have to make an important distinction. We
have to ask what sets apart non-trivial intentions from other, trivial
intentions. This question should have been answered in the essay on real
realism, but there I limited myself to simply giving a short list of
“obviously” trivial intentions. A deeper inquiry is in order in the present
essay.

The first intuition about non-trivial intentions that comes to mind is that
they are rare. Indeed, this goes well with the economical insight mentioned
earlier, namely that the value of something is increased by its paucity. But
is being rare enough for being valuable? If we continue taking inspiration
from the analogy with the open market, something is valuable at all if
someone needs it. A stone of a particular shape can be pretty rare, but if
it is not useful in any way, it is not valuable. A fallacy arising from the
confusion between what is rare and what is valuable is widespread in the art
world. There it takes the form of the pursuit of novelty as a
self-sufficient, primary goal of art. The usual intention of artists is to
distinguish themselves from all other artists, which is simply another way
to say that they want their artworks to have some qualities that are scarce
in comparison to other artworks. One way to achieve this is to make sure
that a similar kind of thing was not produced before. This understanding of
art as an almost academic activity of exploration of all possible forms of
expression was not always the norm. There was a moment (let us say, mid-19th
century) when this artistic intention was non-trivial. However, as soon as
it became well-understood and universally adopted it became trivial.

The Oxford dictionary of English defines “intention” as “a thing intended;
an aim or plan”. The verb “to intend” is similarly circularly defined via
the noun “intention” and the synonym “to plan”. In the absence of help from
the dictionary we have to ask ourselves what are the qualities of an
intention? First, it is a conscious act. Second, it is something that has a
rationale and an expected result.

To what extent a conscious actor is aware of the set of reasons that concern
it? From the human vantage point we can say with confidence that animals and
insects are not aware of all reasons that concern them. An ant is hardly
consciously aware (or can be aware due to its simple brain) what role it
plays in the organization of its own colony. Many moths have “eye-spots”
patterns on their wings. Their design takes into account such factors as eye
sensitivity of potential predators and their likely position at the crucial
moment of attack. However, the moths themselves are oblivious to this
rationale for the markings on their wings. More than that, rationales for
the design of such wing markings were “appreciated by, thought out by, and
rendered explicit by *no one*” (Dennett, 1984). These rationales are, as
Dennett calls them, “free-floating”.

Is it any different for us? Hardly. Being aware of all reasons that concern
us requires omniscience and infinite computational resources. It is true
that we are in a privileged position because we can reflect on our own
reflections and the access to this meta-level of deliberation enhances our
chances of behaving in an appropriate way, seeing more reasons that concern
us. However, one can only reflect on one thing at a time and in general, as
the proof in computability theory shows, the “halting problem” has no
solution: there is no program that can inspect any program and show whether
or not it contains infinite loops. What this means is that we cannot, even
in principle, perform a full analysis of reasons that concern us. We always
have to use some heuristics in our deliberation, and those heuristics always
have blind spots.

There is a direct parallel between the moth who does not comprehend the
rationale for the markings on its wings and humanity. Both are systems that
evolve according to a certain set of reasons, oblivious to those reasons.
Humanity, like the moth, never consciously reflected on where it is going.
It cannot. Its current state evolved naturally from a few general ideas and
needs that most individuals share. Even when we look at a lower level, most
people are extremely individualistic. This is not a reproach, but a fact. (A
reproach would require a moral system that is applicable at the scale of
humanity, but the moral systems we have evolved to suit much smaller scales,
they may or may not be fully applicable.) Business people think about making
money, engineers think about how to solve technical problems, writers think
about what is interesting to read. Rarely do people ask “to what end in the
grand scheme of things?”

The difference between the moth and humanity is that the sets of reasons
that concern them determine designs that are approximated in different
media. For the moth the medium is its DNA, and therefore the process of
approximation takes a long time. It is faster with humans, since their
medium is culture; it is about rationality, ideas, and ultimately behavior
and the structures humans form in the society. These things can evolve much
faster than DNA, but they are similarly independent of what any single
individual thinks. A certain idea can become popular and receive
amplification, but not because of an individual genius of the idea or its
author. This happens because the system in this particular period of time is
receptive to such an idea, i.e. the idea fits the free-floating rationale
that concerns humanity at that point.

What this leaves us with is a process where we gradually (hope to)
understand more and more reasons that concern humanity, or certain groups of
people within humanity. Some of the reasons are well-known and they result
in trivial intentions, for example that we need to eat in order to stay
alive, or that an artist should do something in a novel way as if in a kind
of competition. Some reasons that did not exist before come into existence.
Other reasons perhaps existed for a while but only now are realized. As soon
as a reason or a rationale is realized by an individual whom it concerns, an
intention arises. We could try to consider the intermediate situation where
a rationale is realized but is not acted upon, but let us say that in that
case it does not truly concern the individual in question.

At this point we have an idea of how certain intentions can be more rare
than others. However, as mentioned earlier this is not enough to make them
valuable. “Valuable” in this context has to mean “relevant for others”,
there is hardly a more compelling definition. Thus, non-trivial intentions
are those that are motivated by reasons that concern a large number of
people but are realized by few. Their value (or purpose) is in enabling the
process of evolution of humanity in a direction that is informed by the set
of reasons that concern it. It is important to note, however, that by
“reasons that concern humanity” I mean not only reasons that have to do with
physical survival as in the case of evolutionary development, but also those
that have to do with its stability and development according to its nature.
What this means is that non-triviality in relation to X depends on the
casual path that led to formation X. For example, the analogue of
non-trivial intentions in the case of the moth are non-trivial mutations.
The moth could probably do without “eye-spots” patterns on its wings; it
could have evolved in a different direction entirely and in that case we
would label different mutations as non-trivial. This approach to
non-triviality is similar to the approach I take with attribution of value
(see the [footnote 1](#fn1)). It can be roughly rephrased as: things that
happened to be important are valuable and non-trivial. It seems to me that
this is a sound principle in a universe with the arrow of time.

Finally, an intention may be called non-trivial by an individual, but how do
we know that it is? This is an epistemological problem. Meaningful
estimation of non-triviality from the human point of view is only possible
in retrospect, sometimes much later, when we are in a position to understand
the context in which it arose and its consequences at an appropriate scale.

Seen from this angle, the idea of non-trivial intentions does not seem to be
tied to art. It is the other way around, if we talk about Art with a capital
A. To have a non-trivial intention is to deviate from the behavioral norm.
This can happen through art, the results can be communicated through art,
but that's not the only way. In other words, art-making is not a valuable
activity *per se*, it is a valuable activity *per accidens*. Having
non-trivial intentions, on the other hand, is a valuable activity *per se*.
As long as a non-trivial intention is being implemented by a person, there
is no use in attaching labels to various activities that person may
exercise. Therefore, I will not try to define whether the system that is the
subject of this essay is art or not, what constitutes an artwork in relation
to that system, and who is the artist. All these questions are irrelevant in
the sense that they do not contribute towards a better implementation of the
intention in question.

## On the real realist intention

Let us recall the real realist intention (RRI):

> Resist the general trend in allocation of attention and explore raw
  reality more thoroughly.

For now I am going to ignore the adjective “raw” in this formulation. It
will become important later, once we have made progress with understanding
what the RRI is supposed to achieve.

What does it mean to explore reality more thoroughly? Does it mean that one
should concentrate on (1) objects that make up reality and their properties
(the epistemic angle); or should we rather focus on (2) perception of
reality (the phenomenological angle)? Very approximately, we could say that
(1) has to do with realizations about the external world and it is addressed
by science while (2) is about realizations that concern our mental life as
we experience it and it is addressed by art. Seen from this angle the RRI
shares its agenda with art: it is about provoking a particular kind of
phenomenological realizations (for lack of a better term) which cannot be
summarized in words, since all of them would end up as mere truisms.

That said, the method that I have in mind for implementing the RRI is
different from the typical approach in art. Art in the vast majority of
cases is about production of objects. Those objects are instrumental in
bringing about stimuli that (under normal conditions) are supposed to
provoke certain reactions in the individual. By varying the stimuli
different reactions can be solicited. There is, however, a hidden variable
in this process—the way the subject processes the stimuli. For example,
suppose there is a painting. It is going to be perceived differently
depending on the perceiver's knowledge of art in general and this particular
artwork in particular, whether they themselves have painted before, and
whether they have been instructed to pay particular attention to a certain
aspect of the painting. To put it simply, in art there is usually no attempt
to control the *how* of the perceptual process, that is, the artist does not
control minute details of the way their artwork is going to be perceived.
The hope is that the *how* will be somehow determined by the *what*, which
is fixed in a given work of art. The RRI has to do with the *how*, while the
*what* is left unspecified.

Before we can discuss the *how* it is necessary to answer another question,
namely, *to what end*? What kind of realizations are we after? There are
several ways to go about answering this question. I would like to proceed by
asking what is the most fundamental property of constituents of reality? The
answer is, it seems to me, that they exist.

Existence in philosophy is typically understood either as a first- or
second-order property of individuals. I suggest to see existence as the
property of being included in a bigger system. On this view an element
exists in a set if it is contained in it. When applied in the conventional
sense, to exist means to be included in the universe. In the case of a
stateful universe like ours this can be further spelled out: an X exists in
the universe U if at some point in the course of unfolding of the causal
evolution of U something that matches the definition of X happens to be
formed for a period of time greater than zero. Thus understood, the
existence of an instance of X is not simply a Boolean value that marks it as
either existing or not, it is also the provenance, context, and the set of
possibilities that are associated with this particular instance of
X[2](footnote:2). In other words, to exist means to be in relation to other
existing things; existence is the totality of these relations over time.

It is probably fair to say that existence of any given thing in our universe
is unfathomable, since we lack understanding of the inner workings of the
universe at its most fundamental level and otherwise our knowledge of
existential relations is limited. However, some of these relations are
readily accessible to our perception even though in normal conditions we
tend to neglect most of them except for those that are salient for the task
at hand. More poetically, we can say that when we perceive an existential
relation of X to Y, we perceive Y reflected in X. Quite obviously, the sun
is reflected in an object illuminated by it, but we could also develop the
ability to appreciate the fact that many things retain their shapes over
time thus reflecting electromagnetic forces in our world, which on this view
become directly perceivable. The story with reflection does not end there,
though, since perceived things also reflect the perceiver. This is true
because there is an obvious relation between X and the perceiver of X: X
provides the perceiver with an instance of what it is like to perceive X,
and this phenomenological realization characterizes the perceiver just as
much as it characterizes X. Thus, the RRI can be understood as attending to
one's own existential reflection[3](footnote:3).

The discussion on existence is supposed to help adjust our perspective on
what we perceive. Instead of attending to things (or classes of things) that
have interesting properties, we shift our attention to existential relations
that are ubiquitous but perhaps not immediately seen. However, the
existential agenda as presented so far does not help with defining the scope
of the RRI because we have not narrowed down the range of existential
relations that we are interested in. The question that we need to answer is
“what kind of perceptual experience is aligned with the RRI?” The
formulation of the RRI from the essay on real realism that I quote in the
beginning of this section does not help answering that question. One useful
piece of information that it contains is the adjective “raw” which hints at
the segregation of objects into two classes: carrier reality (human-made
objects that convey cultural messages) and raw reality (roughly everything
else). This is insufficient for defining the scope of the RRI for at least
two reasons:

1. Not all objects fall neatly into one of the two categories, for example
   living beings.
2. The classification presupposes that the type of an object determines
   unambiguously the way it is perceived, which is not true. Yet it is the
   way in which reality is perceived and interacted with that is important,
   but that is fixed neither in the carrier versus raw reality ontology nor
   in the formulation of the RRI from the essay on real realism.

I suppose it is uncontroversial to say that in the vast majority of cases
material reality is perceived as a means to an end, in order to accomplish a
task at hand. That is not the meaning of the RRI that I have in mind. The
formulation of the RRI also calls to “explore raw reality *more
thoroughly*”. We have narrowed the meaning of the phrase by linking it to
phenomenology of perception, but that is not good enough. A woodworker might
look very carefully at a piece of wood while they work with it, but is that
perceptual experience aligned with the RRI? According to the formulation
from the above it might be.

Clearly, a better definition of the RRI is needed. The first impulse is to
bind the RRI to “raw materiality” of things, perhaps by making a list of
material properties (or material existential relations, which is the same
thing) that are relevant to the RRI. However, this approach is not helpful.
Coming up with a complete and definite list of properties of this kind is a
more difficult project than might seem at first glance. There is also a
deeper problem. The same properties can be experienced differently and have
different meaning depending on the context and the end goal of the
perceptual experience. Let us consider a few examples:

* The same object with exactly the same properties is perceived differently
  if we take it to be a work of art.
* Depending on the situation the same object may look beautiful or
  impractical.
* During day time we often take illumination outdoors for granted. It is
  possible to change that by e.g. imagining it to be part of a short flash
  of light that may cease at any moment.

Perhaps a better way to define the RRI is in terms of values, hence here I
propose the *axiological formulation of the RRI*:

> Perception of material reality is aligned with the RRI when material
  reality is perceived for its intrinsic rather than instrumental
  (extrinsic) value.

According to this formulation, as long as material reality is perceived “for
its own sake” the perceptual experience is aligned with the RRI. This, of
course, only substitutes one question with another, since now we have to
define exactly when material reality is perceived for its intrinsic value. A
much easier question to answer is “when is material reality perceived for
its instrumental value?” Let us look at some examples:

* When I look at a painting I do not care about the colored matter in front
  of me for its own sake; what I care about is seeing the painting this
  matter happens to mediate. Therefore in this case material reality is
  percevied for its instrumental value.
* When I observe an experimental setup in a laboratory with a practical goal
  in mind (perhaps I am about to conduct an experiment), I do it for its
  instrumental value.
* When I look at a beautiful landscape it is fair to suppose that I look at
  it because it fits my idea of what makes for a beautiful landscape. In
  other words, the landscape is only a contingent conduit through which I
  seek to expose myself to what I consider beautiful. Therefore I perceive
  the landscape for its instrumental rather than intrinsic value.

Very well. Let us say that material reality is perceived for its intrinsic
value when it is not perceived for any instrumental value. But how can that
be? Clearly, the list of examples given above seems to exclude almost all
kinds of perceptual experiences (or it can be extended accordingly to do
so). It is as if no matter what we do there is a way to construe our
perceptual experiences as motivated by instrumental value of material
reality.

To make progress we have to first determine what all instances of perceptual
experiences of material reality with instrumental value have in common. The
answer seems to be that there is always an intention N that is mapped to a
non-empty set of salient properties P such that if a given thing T has one
or more of properties from P it will be worthy of being
perceived[4](footnote:4). This is exactly what gives T instrumental value.
It is not T for its own sake but the fact that it has properties from P that
is important. I suggest to call this situation “obstruction by particulars”.
Now, if we take N to be the RRI, what should P be? It should be either (1) a
singleton set containing a property that is shared by all constituents of
reality or (2) it should be a set of all possible properties, so that a
given thing T is always worthy of being perceived. Leaning towards what
appears to be a simpler solution, it should come as no surprise that (1) is
preferable, with the property shared by all constituents of reality being
existence. Existence, of course, is not a property that is immediately
perceivable in the same way as, say, color; it has to be perceived through
attending to existential relations as outlined above.

It seems like we have gone full circle without getting closer to a
straightforward criteria of when a perceptual experience is aligned with the
RRI. One thing is clear: there needs to be some flexibility in how and what
existential relations are perceived if we want to avoid obstruction by
particulars. Perhaps a vocabulary of real realist perceptual tactics (RRPTs)
can be developed such that one or more of them could be applied in any
situation and to any object, similar to how different gears are selected in
a gearbox depending on the required speed or torque. Not a single one of
these tactics can pretend to be the only way to perceive existence, but
together they can, perhaps, provide an adequate approximation. RRPTs will be
explored later in this essay.

Finally, given the preceding discussion about non-trivial intentions one is
probably compelled to wonder what is the set of reasons for the RRI and what
kind of change it aims to bring about. In the essay on real realism there is
an attempt to answer these questions. The answers can no doubt be improved
and made more convincing. One could talk about how carrier reality creates
its own universe which is quite separate[5](footnote:5) from reality and
imagine dystopian prospects for humanity. The problem with this line of
argumentation is that we cannot know for sure how the present trend in
allocation of attention fits in the big picture of evolution of humanity. It
might be the only possible next step, or it might be a swerve in a direction
that needs further adjustment. I believe that the correct way to view the
RRI is as a balancing intention. Its goal is to present an alternative to
the trend that is perceived as the *status quo*, thus allowing the system to
self-regulate. Only time will tell what real implications of the RRI are and
whether it is truly a non-trivial intention.

## On attention

Attention is a mechanism that sits between intention and perception. It is
therefore imperative to consider it before we can make further progress.
Indeed, when we speak about things that are “worthy of being perceived”, we
must consider the mechanism by which such discrimination is carried out.
Here philosophy from the previous section maps perfectly onto biology. The
very presence of such a mechanism of selection is a necessity from an
evolutionary point of view since our brain is limited in the amount of
information that it can process and hence be aware of at one time (e.g.
Broadbent, 1958; Desimone & Duncan, 1995).

Attention can either be captured by external stimuli or controlled
voluntarily by internally generated goals (Klein, 2004). These two types of
attentional control are typically referred to as exogenously driven and
endogenously driven. The prevailing opinion in the field of cognitive
neuroscience seems to be that these two attentional mechanisms are
qualitatively different (Klein, 1994). Exogenously driven attention control
is an evolutionary older mechanism. It is a stimulus-driven bottom-up
process that serves to alert the individual to events that may be important
for survival or rapid scanning of an area. The endogenously driven attention
control, on the other hand, is a more recent top-down mechanism and serves
to enable sustained attention (Nakayama, 1989). There are in fact many ways
in which the two styles of attention control differ, but I do not have the
space to go in details on this. Suffice it to say that only endogenously
driven attention is aligned with the RRI, since only this style of attention
control can be informed by an internally set goal or intention.

The field of cognitive neuroscience has provided us with many examples that
endogenous attention and perception are two closely intertwined phenomena.
Perception is modulated by attention; what is perceived depends directly on
where attention is focused, e.g.:

* Attention modulates such aspects of perception as e.g. contrast
  sensitivity (Carrasco, 2006) and spatial resolution (Carrasco & Yeshurun,
  2009; Enns, Brehaut, & Shore, 1999).
* Inattentional blindness demonstrates that individuals fail to perceive
  unexpected and often salient stimuli as a result of lack of attention
  (Mack & Rock, 1998; Most, Scholl, Clifford, & Simons, 2005; Simons &
  Chabris, 1999).
* Change-blindness is a much-researched phenomenon where individuals fail to
  see major differences between images e.g. when they flicker on and off
  (O'Regan, Rensink, & Clark, 1999; Rensink, O'Regan, & Clark, 1997; Simons
  & Rensink, 2005).

Therefore, it appears justified to hold that there is a crucial difference
between perceiving something among other things while executing a task, and
perceiving the same thing while specifically focusing one's undivided
attention on it. In the case of the RRI the aspects of the world that one is
asked to focus on are so basic and so often taken for granted that,
ironically, they are almost never attended to in an active way in adult
life.

At this point I think it is appropriate to introduce the term “style of
attention” by analogy with the notion of style employed by Maurice
Merleau-Ponty (Zahavi, 2012). He used the term “style” in relation to
sensorimotor activity and held that what is understood through such activity
cannot be paraphrased in separation from its concrete application.
Merleau-Ponty's notion of style is inspired by art. In art, what is
expressed is closely bound up with a specific sensible manner of expression.
Therefore, we cannot grasp the style belonging to the work without
perceiving this manner of expression in a concrete instance. Similarly, we
can only understand the style of our movements and the style of appearance
they present to us through performing such movements ourselves and
encountering what appears (Siewert, 2015). With that in mind, style of
attention is a complex phenomenon that encompasses both what is perceived
and the way attention is allocated and controlled during the perceptual
experience in accordance with the goal. Style of attention wields perception
and attention together and gives them a temporal dimension. Being a kind of
style in the sense of Merleau-Ponty, it can only be understood when it is
lived through. With such an elegant notion at our disposal, it seems
tempting to define the RRI in terms of a particular type of style of
attention. How can this be done?

To answer that question let us consider what attention selects for. Let us
take spatial attention as an example. In this area there are at least two
competing models:

* space-based, that posits that space is the primary unit of selection;
* object-based, that holds that attentional selection is a two-stage process
  where in the first stage the visual field is parsed into perceptual units
  according to gestalt principles of grouping and those units are then
  available for selection in the second stage.

Each of the two theories is supported by findings that are difficult to make
sense of in terms of the other one:

* The space-based model is supported by studies which show that performance
  is negatively impacted when a target stimulus is flanked by spatially
  contiguous distractors (e.g. Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; Posner et al.,
  1980).
* There seem to be a need for spatial attention to disengage from its origin
  before it can shift to another location (Posner & Petersen, 1990; Mackeben
  & Nakayama, 1993; Pratt & Nghiem, 2000).
* Many space-based theories assume that the attentional field is indivisible
  (e.g. Eriksen & Yeh, 1985; Posner et al., 1980), however several studies
  found evidence to the contrary (e.g. Bichot, Cave, & Pashler, 1999;
  Gobell, Tseng, & Sperling, 2004; Kramer & Hahn, 1995). This finding poses
  a major problem for the space-based approach and motivates the
  object-based model. The latter shows how perceptual grouping mechanisms
  make it possible to divide the attentional field, but is unable to explain
  other phenomena that seem to confirm the validity of the space-based
  model.

If both models are correct in the instances described above, then it follows
that the way spatial attention is allocated is not only space- or object-
based, but ad-hoc, meaning that we are capable of diverse selection
strategies depending on the situation (for a similar conclusion based on
experimental data see e.g. Nicol, Watter, Gray, & Shore, 2009). This becomes
even more apparent if we consider that the way attention is deployed and
shifted also changes in time according to the demands of the task at hand
which can be much more complex than those in the experiments quoted above.
If that is correct, then endogenously driven attention cannot be
philosophically dissociated or abstracted away from the goal that drives it,
because it is the interpretation of that goal that determines the selection
strategy.

Now, if we choose not to fix what is perceived as per our prior discussion
of the RRI, the only free variable that remains is the goal that governs
attention. Therefore, we arrive at segregation of styles of attention by
goals. This gives us *the phenomenological formulation of the RRI*:

> The RRI is to experience a style of attention where the goal is defined by
  a real realist perceptual tactic (RRPT).

RRPTs set the goals and inform the individual what to pay attention to. We
will consider a range of RRPTs in the following section, but before we do
that there are some questions to answer about the structure of a perceptual
experience that involves RRPTs. For that we need to consider attention from
a different angle.

Attention can be understood more generally as a selection mechanism.
Selection can happen not only in relation to perception, but also in
relation to action. Hence, choosing an action to perform is also a form of
attention (Alvarez, 2016). Is this kind of attention also aligned with the
RRI? In other words, when we decide which perceptual tactic to employ in
what context (i.e. with what object or area, etc.), is this decision process
(whatever it may be) aligned with the RRI? It appears that the answer is no.
The decision process itself does not involve perception of any kind and so
it does not inform us about reality. For all we know the decision process
can take any form from an almost instantaneous impulse to a lengthy
deliberation. Without going deeper into the structure of the decision
process it is simply safer to remain conservative about it and say that it
does not *per se* result in the kind of style of attention that we are
interested in. This means that it is desirable to make the decision process
as simple as possible lest it constitutes a distraction.

The next important question to consider is that if we take for granted that
there is a range of perceptual tactics to choose from, how should they be
positioned relative to each other? The first intuition that comes to mind is
that perceptual tactics can be exercised either sequentially or in parallel.
The parallel case entails division of attention, which is undesirable, hence
only sequential arrangement is worth consideration. If perceptual tactics
are employed sequentially it is their ordering that should be explained.
There are three possibilities:

1. The ordering is fixed.
2. Not every ordering is correct since there are dependencies of some kind
   between tactics.
3. The ordering is free and left to the individual to determine.

Let us call a sequence of RRPTs a perception routine.

It would seem that one feature of (1) is that it relieves the individual of
the need to make choices between perceptual tactics. That would perhaps be
true if the ordering also contained durations and possibly other information
that unambiguously specified what exactly should be done and when. There are
two main problems with this approach:

* As we increase the amount of instructions we shift the attention of the
  individual from the perceptual experience to the details of how a
  perception routine ought to be carried out. The latter has nothing to do
  with the RRI and constitutes a distraction. It results either in anxiety,
  or boredom, or gamification of the process and is to be avoided.
* In order to give precise instructions it is necessary to have knowledge of
  the situation for which the perceptual routine is composed. Entering this
  data poses the same problems of not having anything to do with the RRI,
  being tedious, and introducing an element of gamification.

If, on the other hand, only the order of perceptual tactics is specified
without any additional information, then such an approach does not relieve
the individual from making the choice when to stop following one perceptual
tactic and start using another. Is there any other benefit in choosing one
fixed order of perceptual tactics over another? The only justification for
such a choice would be (2)—the fact that there are dependencies between
tactics so that e.g. perceptual tactic A prepares perceptual tactic B and so
B cannot precede A. When I started working on perception routines I allowed
and even expected that there would be such dependencies. However, as I
developed the idea further and defined some RRPTs, it became clear that
there are, in fact, no such dependencies. It may well be that at some later
moment there will be new RRPTs with dependencies between them, but at the
moment it is simply not the case.

Thus, we are left with (3), that is, the order of perceptual tactics is not
defined and the individual is free to determine it. In addition to avoiding
the pitfalls mentioned above in relation to (1), (3) has the added benefit
that decisions made voluntarily have a kind of internal justification and
validity that an imposed sequence of actions cannot have.

The last question that I want to mention in this section is, “if one is free
to choose which RRPTs to use and when, how should they go about it?” This
may sound like a non-issue, but it is actually an important question, since
there are more than twenty RRPTs defined at the moment of this writing and
most of the time all of them are applicable in a given situation. If left
completely to their devices, the individual risks preferring some perceptual
tactics and forgetting the others or having to resort to ad-hoc mnemonic
devices in order to constrain their choices. It has to be noted that
preferring a set of RRPTs at the expense of others reintroduces the danger
of obstruction by particulars. This is because if the set of RRPTs is small
and fixed one may start to perceive reality not for its intrinsic value but
because some fragments of reality have some properties that suit nicely the
“favorite” RRPTs thus chosen. I suggest to call this “obstruction by
particulars via the subject's bias”[6](footnote:6). Granted, this is a much
weaker form of the original problem, but it needs to be acknowledged. All
this said, it seems helpful to quasi-randomly limit the set of perceptual
tactics of any given perception routine to a small fixed number while
providing a good mnemonic for remembering the selected RRPTs. The RRPTs then
can be used freely in any order and in any suitable situation.

## Real realist perceptual tactics (RRPTs)

Let us now consider RRPTs. I have organized them in groups according to four
general ideas that inform the respective tactics. The groups and the
principles behind them will be discussed shortly, but first it is worth
mentioning some general considerations that I used to constrain what an RRPT
can be. They are:

* Accessibility—anyone should be able to follow RRPTs. There should not be
  any prerequisites in terms of equipment or otherwise.
* Applicability—RRPTs should generally be applicable in most if not all
  situations. There should be no need to go to a special location or wait
  for a special moment in order to exercise an RRPT.
* Explicitness—RRPTs should provoke conscious and “self-evident”
  phenomenological realizations.

The first two principles aim to democratize perceptual tactics so as to make
them accessible (at least in theory) to most people. Explicitness is a
somewhat artificial constraint in the sense that it is possible to imagine
perceptual tactics that involve unconscious perception, but for now I choose
to limit the scope of this research to conscious perception.

### Simple RRPTs

RRPTs in this group prompt the individual to experience something readily
available but usually neglected. This is a simple yet powerful idea because
once the individual agrees to practice perception routines they enter a
particular mindset—they are no longer goal-oriented as in everyday
activities, instead they can venture in pure exploration. That exploration,
however, can benefit from some hints and inspiration.

#### Smell

**Formulation**: Choose a suitable object and smell it.

**Note**: Olfaction plays a crucial role in how we experience life. The
contribution of olfaction is perhaps most obvious if we consider what
happens when people lose the ability to perceive smells:

> Patients who lose the sense of smell suddenly complain of life's having
  lost its savour. Affect is flat and the quality of life diminishes. <…>
  Sufferers of anosmia often describe themselves as living behind glass, cut
  off from the world and feeling alienated from familiar settings.

  Smith, 2015

That said, much of normal smell perception happens unconsciously. Conscious
odor perception seems to have evolved to inform us about properties of
particular objects and about changes in the environment rather than about
permanent “ambient” smells (Köster et al., 2014). For example, we typically
do not experience smells of our own homes. Therefore, to provoke a conscious
odor perception it is best to choose a suitable object and smell it.

#### Breath

**Formulation**: Take a slow deep breath, pay attention to qualities of the
air.

**Note**: A deep inhalation often triggers a more thorough engagement of the
olfactory system compared to shallow breathing and results in conscious
perception of increased odor intensity (e.g. Rehn, 1978).

#### Sounds

**Formulation**: Concentrate on what you hear. Note that unlike other sense
modalities we phenomenologically experience sounds from the past as part of
the present. How many distinct sound sources are there? Pay attention to
their spatial position and character. How do reflection and reverberation
contribute to the way sounds describe space? Keep track of new sound sources
that appear. Closing your eyes might be helpful.

#### Pressure

**Formulation**: Choose a suitable surface and press on it with your hand.
Maintain the pressure for some time, thus experiencing materiality of the
surface. Note its texture and temperature. Mentally extrapolate this feeling
to other similar surfaces that surround you. Try to give yourself an account
of their materiality.

**Note**: It must be noted that multi-modal perceptual experiences are
richer than those that involve a single modality. In general, they are
experienced as more real (DeGelder & Bertleson, 2003). In this perceptual
tactic vision is combined with touch; even though vision is not explicitly
mentioned in the formulation above, in practice it will be exercised in
order to locate a suitable surface.

#### Shadows

**Formulation**: Investigate shadows: their position, length, character.
This tactic applies equally in the case of diffuse light. There will always
be shaded areas, e.g. in the vegetation. Explicitly relate shadows to the
angle and character of light and the occluding object.

#### Ground

**Formulation**: Walk so as to change your position. What does the
ground/floor feel like? How hard is it? How does it react when you step on
it? What sounds does it make, if any?

#### Walk (spatial movement)

**Formulation**: Walk so as to change your position. Pay special attention
to things that you pass by. How does the constantly changing angle of view
and your movement contribute to your sense of spatial immersion? Try to
concentrate on your being embedded in the three-dimensional scene that you
are traversing.

**Note**: This perceptual tactic can be seen as another way to explore
reality via perceptual constancy (see below).

#### View from an unusual position/angle

**Formulation**: Observe the environment you are in from an unusual position
and/or angle of view. Note the fact that it is the same scene and yet it
looks different because more of its nature is revealed.

**Note**: Compare with constancy through angle of view below.

### RRPTs based on perspective change

The idea with perspective change is that we perceive the same things and
relations as usual, but we think about them in a new way and this “novel
mental framing” changes what we perceive.

#### Separation through focus

**Formulation**: Concentrate on an object of your choice. Note how it seems
to stand out in relation to its surroundings. What qualities does it have in
comparison to other objects that you are not focused on?

#### Light

**Formulation**: Appreciate the light that illuminates the scene that you
are observing. Do not take it for granted. One way to do it is to imagine
that all observable light is only a short flash that has just started and
can cease at any moment.

#### Spatial reference

**Formulation**: Think of a reference object that you cannot directly
observe, then form an idea of how some other object or area that you observe
is oriented in relation to the reference object. How does this affect your
sense of space perception?

#### Outside perspective

**Formulation**: Visualize your body in its current position and environment
from an outside perspective. Attempt to “disconnect” from your familiar
sense of self and perceive yourself as an independent observer would.

### Expectation-driven RRPTs

Perceptual tactics in this group rely on the fact that humans generally
develop a good idea of what they can expect to perceive when they act in a
familiar setting. For example, we usually can predict with high accuracy
what an object would feel like in our hands when it is sufficiently similar
to other objects that we have examined before. Validation (or invalidation)
of this kind of expectation through comparison with what is actually
experienced appears to have great potential for engaging the individual and
refining their ability to form accurate expectations in the first place.
Indeed, there is a body of research that shows that perceptual expectations
also actively influence what is perceived (e.g. Alley, Schmid, & Doerschner,
2020). As usual, whenever possible I preferred multi-modal interactions.

#### Completion of invisible areas

**Formulation**: Choose a partially occluded object, or an object with an
invisible area (e.g. back side) that you feel you can visualize in your
head. Visualize the invisible area of the object, then change your position
or move the object (if possible) so as to gradually reveal the invisible
area. Compare your expectation with what you actually see.

#### Expectation of deformation

**Formulation**: Choose a suitable object and imagine what it would be like
to deform it both in terms of tactile sensation and what the end result
would look like. Both kinds of deformation, elastic and plastic are
acceptable. Carry out the intended deformation and compare your expectation
with what you actually experience and observe.

#### Expectation of extent

**Formulation**: Choose an object or an area that is at least 3 meters away
from you. Attempt to estimate its size, e.g. in relation to parts of your
body. Visualize yourself next to the chosen object/area, then approach it
and verify your intuitions.

#### Expectation of rearrangement

**Formulation**: Choose an area and imagine what it would like if you
rearranged certain objects in that area in some way. Carry out the
rearrangement and compare your expectation with what you actually see.

#### Expectation of sound

**Formulation**: Choose a suitable object and imagine what it would be like
to provoke a sound by interacting with that object in a certain way. Carry
out the interaction and compare your expectation with what you actually
hear. How does the sound contribute to the sense of materiality of the
chosen object?

#### Expectation of view

**Formulation**: Imagine what you would see from a certain position and an
angle of view that is different from where you are now. Assume that position
and the angle of view and compare your expectation with what you actually
see.

#### Tactile expectation

**Formulation**: Choose an object or a surface. Imagine what it would feel
like to grasp, touch, or perform some other manipulation with that object or
surface. Perform the imagined action while maintaining visual contact with
the chosen object/surface and compare your expectation with reality.

#### Visual reconstruction

**Formulation**: Look carefully at a scene of your choice. Now close your
eyes and try to reconstruct the scene in your head. Open your eyes and
compare your reconstruction with what you actually see.

### Constancy-driven RRPTs

Perceptual constancy is the tendency of the human perceptual system to
perceive objects as having consistent properties even when the conditions of
observation change. For example, there is some ordinary sense in which the
following holds:

* The color of a surface is perceived to be the same no matter the lighting
  conditions.
* The size of an object is perceived to be the same no matter the distance
  from which it is viewed.
* The shape of an object is perceived as constant no matter the angle of
  view.

Perceptual constancy makes a lot of ecological sense, since an animal needs
to be able to recognize unchanging properties and entities across a variety
of different situations in order to act in the world (Gibson, 1979).

In connection with the earlier discussion on the RRI as something that is
supposed to bring out existential relations in the world, perceptual
constancy can be used to better isolate the essence of such relations, since
“the essentials become evident in the context of changing nonessentials”
*\(ibid\.\)*. For example, observing a surface of a certain
color[7](footnote:7) in a variety of lighting condition gives us a better
idea of what the color is like, compared to a single experience with one
specific illumination. In the latter case, one could argue that it is
difficult to make sense of what aspects of the perceptual experience are the
result of the properties of the surface and what of the light source and how
the two are related. Similarly, looking at an object from different angles
gives us a better idea of the shape of the object in question. Furthermore,
the very process of gradually changing the angle of view and observing how
the projection of the object on our retina evolves gives us a direct and
self-explanatory example of what geometry in three-dimensional space is like
(of that particular object and in general).

I adopt the following plan to study existential relations through perceptual
constancy:

1. Find an instance of perceptual constancy and attend to differences in
   perceived properties across a variety of perceptual conditions.
2. Convince yourself that the changing parts are actually the same in a
   certain way. Attend to their sameness.
3. Attribute the differences to a factor. Arrive at a characterization of
   that factor based on the observed differences.

#### Constancy of color

**Formulation**: Choose an object or an area of uniform color or texture.
Notice the fact that even though the color/texture is uniform there is
likely a variation of tone due to uneven light (i.e. there are highlights
and shadows, sharp or diffused). Recognize the variation in tone as
different manifestations of the same color/texture that allow us to perceive
it in a deeper way. What qualities of the incident light does this exercise
reveal?

#### Constancy of sound

**Formulation**: Identify a lasting sound source and start paying attention
to its character. Once you have sufficiently familiarized yourself with the
sound source, start moving in space so as to provoke changes in the
perceived character of the sound. In the simplest cases there will be
changes in volume; reverberation is also likely to be a factor. Note that
the sound source remains the same despite the differences in the perceived
character of the sound. How do these differences describe the space you are
in?

#### Constancy through angle of view

**Formulation**: Concentrate on an object or an area of your choice.
Gradually move around it in various ways while maintaining your attention on
the chosen object/area so as to explore it from different angles.
Concentrate on the fact that it is the same thing in the same position no
matter the angle of view. What qualities of space does this exercise
exemplify?

#### Constancy through deformation

**Formulation**: Choose a suitable object and carry out plastic or elastic
deformation of that object. Observe that after the deformation it is still
the same object. What does this experience reveal about its nature?

#### Constancy through distance

**Formulation**: Concentrate on an object or an area of your choice.
Gradually approach it or move farther away from it so as to change the
distance between you and the chosen object/area. Concentrate on the fact
that it is the same thing of the same physical size no matter the distance
from which it is observed. What qualities of space does this exercise
exemplify?

#### Constancy through time

**Formulation**: Choose an object or an area. Scrutinize it carefully over a
period of time. How does it change in time, if at all? Concentrate on how
the thing you are attending to persists through time; try to see it as an
active process rather than something gratuitous.

## From tactics to perception routines

Now that we have defined some RRPTs, we must return to the question of how
to compose perception routines from individual perceptual tactics. In the
section on attention I have argued that the choice of when to exercise a
particular RRPT should be left to the individual lest they are distracted by
the machinery that an externally guided choice would inevitably imply. That
section concludes with the following:

> …it seems helpful to quasi-randomly limit the set of perceptual tactics
  for any given perception routine to a small fixed number while providing a
  good mnemonic for remembering the selected RRPTs.

The present section will concern itself with technicalities of one way to
achieve this.

Letters of an alphabet generally have good mnemonic value for referencing
words that either begin with a given letter or at least contain it (Worthen
& Hunt, 2011). In what follows I am going to assume English as the target
language, however, the approach that I outline here can be applied to any
language where words are formed from individual letters.

Our first task is to assign a letter in the English alphabet to every RRPT
so that we achieve an injective mapping. Generally, for every pair of an
RRPT and a letter there are two ratings that characterize the fitness of
such a pair:

* Mnemonic affinity—the ability of the letter to refer to the RRPT without
  causing confusion. For example, the letter “l” would be a good mnemonic
  for the RRPT “light”. The letter “i” would be a worse mnemonic, but it
  still would work. The letter “q” would be a poor mnemonic for “light”.
* Probability affinity—how close the normative (i.e. desired) probability of
  the RRPT is to that of the letter in the average English text.

The need to take into account probabilities of letters comes from the fact
that our goal is to generate mnemonic words (one letter per an RRPT) that
will allow us to memorize perception routines. For those mnemonic words to
be easily memorizable for the speakers of a language, they must obey
phonotactic constraints of that language (Storkel, 2001). As we move closer
to that goal, however, it is reasonable to assume that probabilities of
individual letters in mnemonic words will start approaching their
probabilities in statistically significant bodies of text in the language
under consideration. This means that inevitably there is going to be
inequality in probability of RRPTs, therefore it is best to be aware of it
and take it into consideration when we assign letters to RRPTs.

Let us define heuristic formulæ that can be used in order to calculate both
kinds of affinities:

```
mnemonic_affinity keyword letter =
  max(0.05, 1.0 - if letter in keyword
                  then 0.1 * letter_index
                  else 1.0)
  where
    letter_index: index of the first occurrence of letter in keyword

probability_affinity x y =
  let n = max x y
   in (n - abs (x - y)) / n
```

Note that mnemonic affinity can only be calculated between a letter and a
mnemonic keyword. The following table shows all RRPTs with their
corresponding mnemonic keywords:

Tactic                        | Mnemonic keyword
------------------------------|------------------
Breath                        | breath
Completion of invisible areas | invisible
Constancy of color            | color
Constancy of sound            | sound
Constancy through angle       | angle
Constancy through deformation | deformation
Constancy through distance    | distance
Constancy through time        | time
Expectation of deformation    | deformation
Expectation of extent         | extent
Expectation of rearrangement  | rearrangement
Expectation of sound          | sound
Expectation of view           | view
Ground                        | ground
Light                         | light
Outside perspective           | outside
Pressure                      | pressure
Separation through focus      | focus
Shadows                       | shadows
Smell                         | smell
Sounds                        | sounds
Spatial reference             | reference
Tactile expectation           | tactile
Unusual view                  | unusual
Visual reconstruction         | reconstruction
Walk (spatial movement)       | walk

Furthermore, let us assign the following frequency ranks and normative
probabilities among RRPTs:

Tactic                        | Frequency rank | Normative probability
------------------------------|----------------|----------------------
Breath                        | 4              | 0.1000
Completion of invisible areas | 2              | 0.0250
Constancy of color            | 2              | 0.0250
Constancy of sound            | 2              | 0.0250
Constancy through angle       | 3              | 0.0500
Constancy through deformation | 2              | 0.0250
Constancy through distance    | 3              | 0.0500
Constancy through time        | 3              | 0.0500
Expectation of deformation    | 3              | 0.0500
Expectation of extent         | 2              | 0.0250
Expectation of rearrangement  | 2              | 0.0250
Expectation of sound          | 3              | 0.0500
Expectation of view           | 2              | 0.0250
Ground                        | 3              | 0.0500
Light                         | 2              | 0.0250
Outside perspective           | 1              | 0.0125
Pressure                      | 3              | 0.0500
Separation through focus      | 2              | 0.0250
Shadows                       | 2              | 0.0250
Smell                         | 3              | 0.0500
Sounds                        | 3              | 0.0500
Spatial reference             | 2              | 0.0250
Tactile expectation           | 3              | 0.0500
Unusual view                  | 3              | 0.0500
Visual reconstruction         | 1              | 0.0125
Walk (spatial movement)       | 3              | 0.0500

Where the normative probability of a perceptual tactic is based on its rank
and calculated thus:

```
normative_probability tactic =
  weight(tactic)
    / sum(weight(tactic) for tactic in all_tactics)
  where
    weight x = 2.0 ^ frequency_rank(x)
```

Given the two kinds of affinities, we can calculate the overall affinity by
multiplying them:

```
overall_affinity tactic letter =
  mnemonic_affinity(mnemonic_keyword(tactic), letter)
    * probability_affinity(normative_probability(tactic),
                           probability(letter))
```

Probabilities of letters in English are common knowledge (e.g. Lewand,
2000). We can assume:

Letter  | Probability
--------|------------
e       | 0.127
t       | 0.091
a       | 0.082
o       | 0.075
i       | 0.070
n       | 0.067
s       | 0.063
h       | 0.061
r       | 0.060
d       | 0.043
l       | 0.040
c       | 0.028
u       | 0.028
m       | 0.024
w       | 0.024
f       | 0.022
g       | 0.020
y       | 0.020
p       | 0.019
b       | 0.015
v       | 0.0098
k       | 0.0077
j       | 0.0015
x       | 0.0015
q       | 0.00095
z       | 0.00074

Now all we have to do is to solve an assignment problem where we maximize
the total sum of affinities (see e.g. Ramshaw & Tarjan, 2012). The resulting
assignment looks like this:

Tactic                        | Letter | Affinity
------------------------------|--------|---------
Breath                        | e      | 0.6299
Completion of invisible areas | b      | 0.2400
Constancy of color            | c      | 0.8929
Constancy of sound            | u      | 0.7143
Constancy through angle       | a      | 0.6098
Constancy through deformation | m      | 0.4800
Constancy through distance    | z      | 0.0007
Constancy through time        | i      | 0.6429
Expectation of deformation    | d      | 0.8600
Expectation of extent         | x      | 0.0540
Expectation of rearrangement  | q      | 0.0019
Expectation of sound          | s      | 0.7937
Expectation of view           | v      | 0.3920
Ground                        | r      | 0.7500
Light                         | g      | 0.6400
Outside perspective           | j      | 0.0060
Pressure                      | p      | 0.3800
Separation through focus      | f      | 0.8800
Shadows                       | h      | 0.3689
Smell                         | l      | 0.5600
Sounds                        | o      | 0.6000
Spatial reference             | y      | 0.0400
Tactile expectation           | t      | 0.5495
Unusual view                  | n      | 0.6716
Visual reconstruction         | k      | 0.0308
Walk (spatial movement)       | w      | 0.4800

This is a fairly satisfactory solution. Certain tactics such as outside
perspective and visual reconstruction have the lowest frequency rank and
even though they are assigned to letters with much lower probability than
the normative probability of the frequency rank 1, it is still acceptable
because no better assignment is possible for them. The situation is worse
for constancy through distance, expectation of extent, and expectation of
rearrangement which normally should be quite common but they end up being
assigned to rather rare letters. This solution is simply the result of
fitting a collection of tactics into a particular real-world alphabet.

Now that we have assigned RRPTs to letters we must find a way to generate
mnemonic words that will stand for perception routines and will allow us to
memorize them. In general, the task of generating words that phonetically
resemble some source material can be accomplished with something as simple
as a Markov chain. Such a Markov chain can be constructed through analysis
of a statistically significant body of text in the target language. In our
case there is an additional consideration to take into account, since the
letters effectively form a set of RRPTs that can be employed in a given
perception routine, hence there should be no repetition. This can be
achieved by remembering all letters generated so far and excluding them from
the set of possibilities for the next letter. This should still produce
phonetically acceptable words provided they are short enough.

When it comes to length of the words we intend to generate there are two
possibilities:

1. Always generate words of a fixed length.
2. Generate words of varying length.

Essentially, this is a question of deciding the optimal size of the set of
RRPT in a perception routine. As we increase the size of the set it becomes
harder to remember and navigate. On the other hand, sets that are too small
are quickly exhausted and uninteresting. Furthermore, I argue that once the
optimal number of RRPTs per perception routine has been found it does not
make sense to generate perception routines that are larger or smaller than
this number as per the above considerations. Through experimentation I found
that five is a good size for a perception routine. Therefore, all perception
routines are to be represented by five-letter words that I am going to call
*pentads*.

I have developed a prototype generator that implements everything described
in this section and open-sourced it [here][prototype]. Here are example
pentads as generated by the prototype application:

1. Entio
2. Sheir
3. Hatil
4. Anywr
5. Withr
6. Apsen
7. Tedgi
8. Noubt
9. Congl
10. Velin

For example, if we take the first one we can see that it is fairly easy to
remember for a speaker of English and it expands to:

Letter | Tactic
-------|-------------
E      | Breath
n      | Unusual view
t      | Tactile expectation
i      | Constancy through time
o      | Sounds

Please refer to the appendix A for a collection of pre-generated pentads.

## Conclusion

In this essay I have attempted to clarify the idea of non-trivial intentions
and to define the RRI in a more satisfactory way than before. This
theoretical work serves as the foundation for development of a practical,
tangible, and accessible way to implement the RRI, which has always been my
primary goal. It is true that with respect to RRPTs, I have only scratched
the surface and much more work still needs to be done. For example, I have
no confidence that the set of RRPTs presented in this essay is optimal. It
is my hope that it can grow and improve organically at its own pace.

Now that some progress has been done in the area of phenomenology of
perception of reality, it is clear to me that progress is also possible in
the domain of aesthetics of the real. Perhaps it is too early to give up on
art. I believe that the essay on real realism did have something important
to say with respect to a new kind of artworks that honor reality better than
conventional attempts, however, there is still much more we can do in this
area; perhaps the most important discoveries are yet to be made. Let this be
a subject for future work.

## References

* Alley, L. M., Schmid A. C., & Doerschner K. (2020). Expectations affect
  the perception of material properties. Journal of Vision 2020;20(12):1.
  https://doi.org/10.1167/jov.20.12.1.
* Alvarez, G. A. (2016). Attention and action. In Ochsner K. N. & Kosslyn S.
  M. (.ed), The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Neuroscience (p. 256). *Oxford:
  Oxford University Press.*
* Bichot, N. P., Cave, K. R., & Pashler, H. (1999). Visual selection
  mediated by location: Feature-based selection of noncontiguous locations.
  *Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 403-423.*
* Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication. *London: Pergamon
  Press.*
* Carrasco, M. (2006). Covert attention increases contrast sensitivity:
  Psychophysical , neurophysical and neuroimaging studies. *Progress in
  Brain Research, 154, 33-70.*
* Carrasco, M. & Yeshurun, Y. (2009). Covert attention effects on spatial
  resolution. *Progress in Brain Research, 176, 65-86.*
* DeGelder, B. & Bertleson, P. (2003). Multisensory integration, perception
  and ecological validity. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(10), 460-467.*
* Dennett, Daniel C. (1984). Elbow Room: the varieties of free will worth
  wanting. *Oxford university press, p. 24. ISBN 0-19-824790-7.*
* Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual
  attention. *Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18, 193-222.*
* Enns, J. T., Brehaut, J. C., & Shore, D. I. (1999). The duration of a
  brief event in the mind's eye. *Journal of General Psychology, 126,
  355-372.*
* Eriksen, C. W. & Eriksen (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the
  identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. *Perception &
  Psychophisics, 16, 143-149.*
* Eriksen, C. W. & Yeh, Y. (1985). Allocation of attention in the visual
  field. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
  Performance, 11, 583-597.*
* Gibson. J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception (pp.
  72-76 in ed. 2014). *New York: Taylor & Francis, Psychology Press.*
* Gobell, J. L., Tseng, C. H., & Sperling, G. (2004). The spatial
  distribution of visual attention. *Vision Research, 44, 1273-1296.*
* Klein, R. M. (2004). On the control of visual orienting. In M. Posner
  (ed.), Cognitive neuroscience of attention (pp. 29-43.). *New York:
  Guilford Press.*
* Klein, R. M. (1994). Perceptual-motor expectancies interact with covert
  visual orienting under endogenous but not exogenous control. *Canadian
  journal of experimental psychology, 48, 151-166.*
* Köster, E., Møller, P., & Mojet, J. (2014). A “misfit” theory of
  spontaneous conscious odor perception (MITSCOP): reflections on the role
  and function of odor memory in everyday life. *Frontiers in Psychology, 5,
  64.*
* Kramer, A. F. & Hahn, S. (1995). Splitting the beam: Distribution of
  attention over noncontiguous regions of the visual field. *Psychological
  Science, 6, 381-386.*
* Lewand, R. (2000). Cryptological Mathematics (p. 36). *Mathematical
  Association of America. ISBN 978-0883857199.*
* Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional blindness. *Cambridge, MA: MIT
  Press.*
* Mackeben, M. & Nakayama, K. (1993). Express attentional shifts. *Vision
  Research, 33, 85-90.*
* Most, S. B., Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J. (2005). What
  you see is what you set: Sustained inattentional blindness and the capture
  of awareness. *Psychological Review, 112(1), 217-242.*
* Nakayama, K. & Mackeben, M. (1989). Sustained and transient components of
  focal visual attention. *Vision Research, 29, 1631-1647.*
* Nicol, J. R., Watter, S., Gray, K., & Shore, D. I. (2009). Object-based
  perception mediates the effect of exogenous attention on temporal
  resolution. *Visual cognition, 27, 555-573.*
* O'Regan, J. K., Rensink, R. A., & Clark, J. J. (1999). Change-blindness as
  a result of “mudsplashes”. *Nature, 398(6722), 34-34.*
* Posner, M. I. & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the human
  brain. *Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25-42.*
* Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R. R., & Davidson, B. J. (1980). Attention and
  the detection of signals. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
  109, 160-174.*
* Pratt, J. & Nghiem, T. (2000). The role of the gap effect in the orienting
  of attention: Evidence for attentional shifts. *Visual cognition, 7,
  629-644.*
* Ramshaw, L. & Tarjan. R. E. (2012). On minimum-cost assignments in
  unbalanced bipartite graphs.
  <https://www.labs.hpe.com/techreports/2012/HPL-2012-40.pdf> *HP research
  labs.*
* Rehn T. (1978). Perceived odor intensity as a function of air flow through
  the nose. Sens Processes. 1978 Sep;2(3):198-205. PMID: 749201.
* Rensink, R. A., O'Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see or not to
  see: The need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. *Psychological
  Science, 8(5), 368-373.*
* Siewert C. (2015). Phenomenological Approaches. In Matthen, M. (ed.), The
  Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Perception (p. 147). *Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.*
* Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained
  inattentional blindness for dynamic events. *Perception, 28(9),
  1059-1074.*
* Simons, D. J., & Rensink R. (2005). Change blindness: Past, present, and
  future. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(1), 16-20.*
* Smith, B. C. (2015). The chemical senses. In Matthen, M. (ed.), The Oxford
  Handbook of Philosophy of Perception (p. 347-348). *Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.*
* Storkel H. L. (2001). Learning new words: phonotactic probability in
  language development. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2001 Dec;44(6):1321-37. doi:
  10.1044/1092-4388(2001/103). PMID: 11776368.
* Worthen, J. B., & Hunt, R. R. (2011). Mnemonology: Mnemonics for the 21st
  century. *New York: Psychology Press.*
* Zahavi, D. (ed.) (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary
  Phenomenology. *Oxford: Oxford University Press.*

## Appendix A: 100 perception routine pentads

Here are 100 pre-generated pentads (the output can be reproduced by running
`proutine -n 100 -i -s 0`, commit
`5d1cdbbb3283484771c46fae55f18260db201d61`):

1. Ature
2. Ofter
3. Ranet
4. Ingly
5. Lasoc
6. Cruen
7. Dinec
8. Hersu
9. Coure
10. Thery
11. Haver
12. Saide
13. Ablyd
14. Sudea
15. Inkfa
16. Ingly
17. Torec
18. Hicke
19. Ingbo
20. Beins
21. Tould
22. Haver
23. Buten
24. Ofest
25. Sirdo
26. Thapr
27. Cover
28. Ofesp
29. Towne
30. Hareg
31. Heryb
32. Ingly
33. Betha
34. Therf
35. Ityle
36. Beyou
37. Evist
38. Ofted
39. Sherc
40. Yawne
41. Forea
42. Predi
43. Oneys
44. Larcy
45. Actle
46. Loyfu
47. Therb
48. Andie
49. Wayin
50. Amery
51. Youte
52. Sated
53. Inter
54. Pring
55. Evour
56. Garce
57. Inagu
58. Other
59. Eagry
60. Ofted
61. Urain
62. Oftep
63. Evalf
64. Heran
65. Dince
66. Gemak
67. Strue
68. Nothe
69. Towil
70. Sayet
71. Wityl
72. Impau
73. Lothe
74. Conds
75. Thard
76. Quedg
77. Andsh
78. Undsh
79. Inget
80. Cande
81. Andes
82. Whime
83. Hingt
84. Enclu
85. Wasur
86. Itual
87. Wriag
88. Utenj
89. Andsh
90. Thery
91. Furpe
92. Inget
93. Anise
94. Mysen
95. Theri
96. Inged
97. Forme
98. Roven
99. Smare
100. Pealt

[prototype]: https://github.com/mrkkrp/perception-routines
[real-realism]: /essay/real-realism.html

----

> footnotes

  1. It is legitimate to ask what kind of value is meant here. Obviously, it
     is not monetary value. The reader will probably infer that what I mean
     is not exactly the folk notion of value nor the notion of value used by
     art critics and the art world in general in relation to contemporary
     developments (notion A). Can there be a better definition? Value can
     only be attributed by a conscious actor (or should we say by a *caring*
     actor?), it cannot be assigned “mechanically” based on a principle.
     Therefore a notion of value is either subjective and private or
     otherwise it is the result of a consensus of some kind. A subjective
     notion of value does not require justification, but it is also of
     limited applicability. Clearly, this is not what I have in mind since
     relevance to the society figures prominently in my text. What is the
     source of consensus for the notion of value that I employ? It has to be
     future humanity (notion B). How is this different from the notion A
     mentioned above? I think the crucial difference is that in the notion B
     it is future generations that perform the judgment and they do so from
     a comfortable and relatively objective position of being temporarily
     removed from what they judge while having the benefit of knowing much
     more context e.g. about what came next. We, of course, do not have
     direct access to judgments of future generations, therefore various
     heuristics must be used instead.

     Even if the notion B seems plausible, there are more questions to be
     asked about it, such as whether attribution of value through a
     consensus that happens later is always more accurate (in some
     yet-to-be-defined sense) than earlier attributions of value.
     Unfortunately, I do not have the space to develop this topic further
     here.

  2. Here and later when I talk about possibilities I always mean
     epistemological and phenomenological possibilities, lest we fall into
     the trap of discussing such things as actualism. Granted, this colors
     existence as subjective, but there is no harm done, since the RRI
     itself is subjective.

  3. This phrase is beautiful, but it needs clarifications. One would not be
     wrong to say that as long as one lives and remains conscious they
     attend to their existential reflection. In this essay I am after a
     particular “flavor” of existential reflection, one that has to do with
     how we can confront material reality phenomenologically at the most
     fundamental level.

  4. It might seem that I mean that we can actually control what we
     perceive, which is obviously not the case. What we can do is control
     how we allocate our attention. Attention is discussed in the next
     section.

  5. Obviously, nothing that exists can be separate from reality. Still, I
     believe there is a useful metaphorical sense in which the phrase can be
     understood.

  6. The attentive reader must have noticed that in relation to obstruction
     by particulars via the subject's bias, there is the elephant in the
     room, namely that since we leave the choice of objects and situations
     in which a given perceptual tactic is employed completely to the
     individual, they will inevitably exhibit biases in their choices,
     whether or not they are aware of them. For example, if someone prefers
     interacting with objects of type X, it becomes hard to tell whether
     they are following a perception routine in order to implement the RRI
     or they fall victim to obstruction by particulars and all they are
     really interested in is X-ness. After some consideration I decided that
     this problem is a lesser evil than its possible solutions, since a
     completely unbiased selection of objects and situations would
     inevitably introduce delegation of control and thus gamification of the
     whole process.

  7. The reader could object to my liberal use of the word “color” here. It
     is true that more formal treatment of this example would require us to
     take a detour into philosophy of perception and give a satisfactory
     definition of color. This is something I have no space to go into. My
     point is simple: witnessing X in a variety of different situations
     generally gives more information about what X is compared to observing
     it in one single situation.
